---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.16.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Example Workflow

Here we provide an example of a general workflow where we define a `QuantumProgram` based on a "codepack" (i.e. prebuilt `QECCode` object) and an ideal noise model.

## `QECCode` from a Codepack

As always, we begin with our imports.
In this example, we are using `pyGSTi` for our circuits and noise model, and `quantumsim` for our quantum states, so we import the relevant backends.
We also import the relevant codepack, in this case a [[5,1,3]] (a.k.a. 5-qubit) code.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from loqs.backends import QSimQuantumState, PyGSTiNoiseModel, PyGSTiPhysicalCircuit
from loqs.core import QuantumProgram
from loqs.codepacks import codepack_5_1_3_quantinuum2022 as codepack_5_1_3
```

Creating the `QECCode` from the codepack is as simple as calling the `create_qec_code()` function.
More complex codepacks could take additional arguments here to customize the resulting `QECCode`;
for example, options could include auxiliary qubit reuse (e.g. Surface-13 vs Surface-17), different syndrome extraction schedules, etc.

In this case, we call the default configuration of the 5-qubit code.
Note that there is a single argument called `circuit_backend`- this determines what circuit backend is used for any physical circuits that are needed.
Currently, the default (and only allowed option) is `PyGSTiPhysicalCircuit`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
code_5q = codepack_5_1_3.create_qec_code(circuit_backend=PyGSTiPhysicalCircuit)
```

One of the main features of a `QECCode` is the list of `Instruction` objects that are available.
We can print those out for the 5-qubit codepack and see that we have things like both fault-tolerant (FT) and non-fault-tolerant (non-FT) state preparation, logical gates, and stages for an adaptive measurement scheme.
More details on the exact `Instruction` implementations can be found in the codepack.

```{code-cell} ipython3
list(code_5q.instructions.keys())
```

## Defining a Noise Model

In order to do simulation, we will also need a noise model.
For convenience, the codepack also provides an ideal (i.e. noiseless) model with all the operations needed to run the physical circuits in `code_5q` created above.
Users will almost certainly want to provide their own (noisy) models, but this ideal model can serve as a good starting point to check what connectivity/gate set is needed.

Note that as with the `create_qec_code()` function above, we take a `model_backend` parameter that in the future will allow users to quickly change out the model backend.
Currently, the default (and only allowed option) is `PyGSTiNoiseModel`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Define the physical qubit labels for our system here
qubits = ["A0", "A1"] + [f"D{i+2}" for i in range(5)]

ideal_model = codepack_5_1_3.create_ideal_model(qubits, model_backend=PyGSTiNoiseModel)
```

## Creating an `InstructionStack`

With our noise model and QEC code specified, we can finally start to create a `QuantumProgram`.

First, we create a list that will become our `InstructionStack`.
The entries are tuples with the following entries:

1. Either key into `QuantumProgram.global_instructions` or a `QECCode.instructions` (discussed more below) or an actual `Instruction` object
2. A patch label
3. A tuple of any arguments to pass into the `Instruction.apply_fn` (discussed in the [Instruction tutorial](/objguide/instructions.md))
4. A dict of any keyword arguments to pass into the `Instruction.apply_fn` (discussed in the [Instruction tutorial](/objguide/instructions.md))

You'll notice that all of the keys below are strings rather than an `Instruction`.
These are converted into the proper instructions by the `QuantumProgram` by first looking into `QuantumProgram.global_instructions` and then in all `QECCode.instructions` for the given patch (if a patch label is provided).

Three types of instructions are automatically generated in the `QuantumProgram.global_instructions` based on the `state_type` and `patch_types` arguments in `QuantumProgram.__init__`:

1. An `"Init State"` that a state backend object based on the value of `state_type`
2. One `"Init Patch {patch_key}"` for each `patch_key` in `patch_types` that can create `QECCodePatch` objects
3. An `"Remove Patch"` instruction that can delete `QECCodePatch` objects

We use the first two of these autogenerated global instructions to initialize the physical quantum state and a 5Q code patch.
The next two instructions act on the patch we have created, and (non-fault-tolerantly) create a logical $\ket{-}$ state and subsequently measure it in the logical $X$ basis.

```{code-cell} ipython3
state_type = QSimQuantumState
patch_types = {"5Q": code_5q}

# Stack
# The "Init *" instructions will be generated by the QuantumProgram based on the values
# of state_type and patch_types below
stack = [
    ("Init State", None, (len(qubits),), {"qubit_labels": qubits}), # Autogenerated from state_type
    ("Init Patch 5Q", None, ("L0", qubits)), # Autogenerated from patch_types. Note that 5Q here must be a key into the patch_types dict below
    ("Non-FT Minus Prep", "L0"),
    ("Non-FT Logical X Measure", "L0")
]
```

## Creating a `QuantumProgram`

Finally, we can combine our stack, noise model, and state/patch types.
We also give the program a name for better logging.

```{code-cell} ipython3
program = QuantumProgram(
    stack,
    default_noise_model=ideal_model,
    state_type=state_type,
    patch_types=patch_types,
    name="Prep minus, measure X"
)
```

## Running a `QuantumProgram`


We execute the program by calling the `run()` function. In this case, let's run it more than once - we can run it 100 times by specifying `shots=100` to the `run()` function.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# And now we can run it for real!
program.run(shots=100)
```

The individual `History` objects are now available in `program.shot_histories` member variable.

For example, we could print out the `History` corresponding to the last shot just to get a sense for what this object looks like.

```{code-cell} ipython3
:tags: [scroll-output]

print(program.shot_histories[-1])
```

While this is handy for looking at the details of a specific shot, we are often more interested in some collective result.
In this case, we may be interested in the `"logical_measurement"` element of the final `Frame`.

We can collect these using the `collect_shot_data()` function, where we specify a `Frame` key and a set of indices into the `History` for which frames to target (in this case, we are only interested in the final frame so use `-1`.)

This will return a list of 100 entries (one per shot), so we instead use a `Counter` collection to look at how many of these are 0 or 1.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from collections import Counter

# collect_shot_data lets us pull out keys from the histories of every shot
# In this case, we pull logical_measurement from the last frame (-1) of each shot
# We pass it into Counter to get more convenient 0/1 counts
Counter(program.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))

# Because we prepped logical minus and did a logical X measurement, we expect to get all 1s here
```

As expected, because we performed a logical $\ket{-}$ measurement and then measured in the $X$ basis, we are determinstically in the -1 eigenstate of the $X$ basis (as indicated by a measurement outcome of 1).

## Running with a new `InstructionStack`

We may commonly want to use the same `QuantumProgram`, but run on a new `InstructionStack`.

The `QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program()` class method is designed for this purpose, where we want to copy a `QuantumProgram` but swap out some of the components.
In this case we are only replacing the stack and name, but you can also change the underlying state or patch types, noise model, RNG seed, etc.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Make a version that goes to logical 0 and measures in Z
stack = [
    ("Init State", None, (len(qubits),), {"qubit_labels": qubits}), # Autogenerated from state_type
    ("Init Patch 5Q", None, ("L0", qubits)), # Autogenerated from patch_types. Note that 5Q here must be a key
    ("Non-FT Minus Prep", "L0"),
    ("H", "L0"), # Rotate to logical Z basis
    ("X", "L0"), # Flip from -1 eigenstate to +1 eigenstate
    ("Non-FT Logical Z Measure", "L0")
]

# We want to use the same program settings, just swap out the stack and name
program2 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program, stack, name="Prep 0, measure Z")

program2.run(shots=100)

Counter(program2.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

## Seeding RNG for Undeterminate Measurement Outcomes

The previous programs were all determinate outcome circuits;
however, it is more often the case that any measurements will probabilistically return 0 or 1.
In this case, it is often a good practice to seed the random number generation (RNG) for these operations such that programs can be done reproducibly.

We show one such usage here.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Now let's stay in minus but measure in Z
stack = [
    ("Init State", None, (len(qubits),), {"qubit_labels": qubits}), # Autogenerated from state_type
    ("Init Patch 5Q", None, ("L0", qubits)), # Autogenerated from patch_types. Note that 5Q here must be a key
    ("Non-FT Minus Prep", "L0"),
    ("Non-FT Logical Z Measure", "L0")
]

# This one will be non-determinate outcome. Let's seed the RNG
program3 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program, stack, default_base_seed=20240702, name="Prep -, measure Z")

program3.run(shots=1000) # Let's also collect more statistics!

Counter(program3.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

And now we create a copy of this program (i.e. it has the same base seed since we are not updating it) to demonstrate that we get the exact same counts out.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# And now we can show that it's deterministic counts with the same RNG seed
program4 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program3, name="Prep -, measure Z... again")

program4.run(shots=1000) # Let's also collect more statistics!

Counter(program4.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

## Saving a QuantumProgram

Any object that is derived from `loqs.internal.Serializable` can be easily serialized with the following API:

- `to_serialization`: This usually returns a `dict` that is JSON-able.
- `dumps`: Similar to `json.dumps`, it is a string version of the output of `to_serializable`.
- `dump`: Similar to `json.dump`, this writes the output of `to_serializable` to a file pointer.
- `write`: Similar to `dump`, but it takes a filename/path instead. This is likely to be the most commonly used serialization function.

Deserialization is just as simple, and follows a similar API with reverse functions: `from_serialization` creates the object from a JSON-able dict, `loads` creates the object from the string version of the dict, `load` creates the object from a file pointer, and `read` creates the object from a filename/path.

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Note that this can take some time.
# Currently ~20 seconds for 1000 shots, and 1.6 GB uncompressed
program4.write('test.json')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
# Currently this takes ~20 seconds to reload
program5 = QuantumProgram.read('test.json')
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
# And we still have all our shot histories
Counter(program5.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

```{code-cell} ipython3

```
