---
title: Program
marimo-version: 0.23.1
---

```python {marimo}
import marimo as mo
```

# The QuantumProgram

The `QuantumProgram` is the key object needed to define and run a logical qubit simulation.
It contains the desired `InstructionStack` to execute, any global instructions that are not provided by a `QECCode`, and a default noise model.
After execution, it will also contain per-shot `History` objects detailing each simulation.

## Defining a Program

Technically, the only thing required to define a `QuantumProgram` is an `InstructionStack` (or at least a list of `InstructionLabel`-castable objects).
However, defining a program this way would require the `InstructionStack` to be very explicit;
for instance, each `InstructionLabel` would have to include the `Instruction` itself rather than a human-readable label string, and any operations using physical circuits would need to pass the noise model in explicitly via the label args/kwargs.

Instead, the minimum recommended objects to pass to a `QuantumProgram` are:

- The required `InstructionStack`
- A default noise model that is passed in to all physical circuit operations that do not specify one via the label args/kwargs
- A state backend to use for the autogenerated `Init State` global instruction label
- A dict of `QECCode` objects to use for autogenerated `Init Patch {key}` global instruction labels (where `{key}` is the key of the `QECCode` in the dict)

```python {marimo}
from loqs.backends import QSimQuantumState
from loqs.core import QuantumProgram
from loqs.codepacks import codepack_5_1_3_quantinuum2022 as codepack_5_1_3
code_5q = codepack_5_1_3.create_qec_code()
patch_types = {'5Q': code_5q}
qubits = ['A0', 'A1'] + [f'D{i + 2}' for i in range(5)]
ideal_model = codepack_5_1_3.create_ideal_model(qubits)
_stack = [('Init State', None, (len(qubits),), {'qubit_labels': qubits}), ('Init Patch 5Q', None, ('L0', qubits)), ('Non-FT Minus Prep', 'L0'), ('Non-FT Logical X Measure', 'L0')]
# Stack
# The "Init *" instructions will be generated by the QuantumProgram based on the values
# of state_type and patch_types below
program = QuantumProgram(_stack, default_noise_model=ideal_model, state_type=QSimQuantumState, patch_types=patch_types, name='Prep minus, measure X')  # Autogenerated from state_type  # Autogenerated from patch_types. Note that 5Q here must be a key into the patch_types dict below
```

## Executing a Program

The program can be executed with the `run()` function. A number of num_shots can be provided to run the program multiple times for better statistics.

```python {marimo}
results = program.run(num_shots=100)
```

## Analyzing a Program

The raw shot history can be accessed directly via `results.shot_histories` where `results` is the `ProgramResults` object returned by `program.run()`.

Note some key features that have been covered in other sections:

- [Expiring keys](history-expiring-keys): The `"state"` key is listed as `EXPIRED` on everything but the last frame
- [Propagating keys](history-propagating-keys): The `"state"`, `"stack"`, and `"patches"` keys are available in every frame
- [Parameter priorities](instruction-parameter-priorities): The first two instructions have non-standard parameter priorities (the first because of the variadic `**kwargs` and the second just to swap the order of `"history[-1]"` and `"instruction"`).
- [`PatchDict` recordable](recordables-patchdict): Once constructed in the second frame, the `PatchDict` contains the relevant 5-qubit code `QECCodePatch` that is used for instruction resolution when the patch label is `"L0"` (more details on this below).

```python {marimo}
print(results.shot_histories[99])  # Access last shot history by key
```

However, we often care about more collective statistics across all the num_shots.
These can be quickly collected via `results.collect_shot_data()`, which takes a frame key and frame index in the respective shot histories.

```python {marimo}
from collections import Counter

# Collect logical_measurement from the last frame in every shot
# Use a Counter purely for convenience
Counter(results.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

## Changing a Program

To make provenance of `History` objects easier, the inputs used by the `QuantumProgram` are designed to not be changed.
However, often we may want to run a related program, i.e. with a different `InstructionStack`, noise model, etc.
In that case, we can use the `from_quantum_program` class method to create a new `QuantumProgram` with those options replaced (and no shot history).

```python {marimo}
_stack = [('Init State', None, (len(qubits),), {'qubit_labels': qubits}), ('Init Patch 5Q', None, ('L0', qubits)), ('Non-FT Minus Prep', 'L0'), ('Non-FT Logical Z Measure', 'L0')]
program2 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program, _stack, default_base_seed=20240702, name='Prep -, measure Z')  # Autogenerated from state_type
results2 = program2.run(num_shots=1000)  # Autogenerated from patch_types. Note that 5Q here must be a key
# This one will be non-determinate outcome. Let's seed the RNG
Counter(results2.collect_shot_data('logical_measurement', -1))  # Let's also collect more statistics!
```

Note that in this case, we have set a base seed for RNG since we expect a non-determinate outcome.
This seed is *not* updated by default through `from_quantum_program`, allowing programs to run using the same RNG.
Conversely, users should reset the RNG seed if they want different samples.

```python {marimo}
# Keep RNG the same
program3 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program2, name="Prep -, measure Z, same RNG")
results3 = program3.run(num_shots=1000)
Counter(results3.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

```python {marimo}
# Change the RNG
program4 = QuantumProgram.from_quantum_program(program2, default_base_seed=202400711, name="Prep -, measure Z, diff. RNG")
results4 = program4.run(num_shots=1000)
Counter(results4.collect_shot_data("logical_measurement", -1))
```

## (Advanced) Internal Functionality

Most users will not need to know *how* the `QuantumProgram` performs instruction resolution or parameter collection.
However, we describe these internal functions here for the curious.
Or on the extremely off-chance *(sarcasm)* that something goes wrong, and knowing these details allows workarounds.

(quantumprogram-instruction-resolution)=
### Resolving Instructions

By "instruction resolution", we mean that the program takes an instruction label (e.g. `"Init State"`, `"X"`, etc. in the above examples) and figures out which `Instruction` object it corresponds to.
The conditional logic is as follows:

1. If the patch label is `None`, this must be a global instruction. Look this up in `QuantumProgram.global_instructions` and return (or error if not found)
2. Otherwise, we must have a patch label and be referring to a patch instruction.
    1. Check that we have a valid `PatchDict` via `"patches"` in the last frame
    2. Check that we can look up the `QECCodePatch` with the patch label
    3. Look up the instruction from the `QECCodePatch` and return (or error if not found)

As seen above, there are multiple places instruction resolution can fail.
The error messages contain hints about which lookup failed, so ensure that the relevant instruction/patch/patchdict is available at the time of resolution.

(quantumprogram-parameter-collection)=
### Collecting Instruction Parameters

By "parameter collection", we mean that the program collates all possible stateful data, looks at each required argument to the `Instruction.apply_fn` function, and uses the [parameter priorities](instruction-parameter-priorities) in `Instruction.param_priorities` to provide the most up-to-date information to the `Instruction`.

Parameter priority is resolved in order based on `param_priorities`, and in the following manner for each source:

**"label"**:
1. If positional arguments were provided, the position of the parameter is checked. If the position is less than the length of the provided args, the parameter is taken from positional arguments and returned
2. Next, the parameter is looked up by key in the label kwargs and returned if available
3. Otherwise, the parameter was not provided by the label args/kwargs and we move on to the next source

**"instruction"**:
1. The parameter is looked up by key in the `Instruction.data` and returned if available
2. Otherwise, the parameter was not provided by the `Instruction` and we move on to the next source

**"program"**:
1. The parameter is looked up by key in a dict of data that is available to the `QuantumProgram`. Currently this is:
    - `"history"`: The current shot `History`
    - `"patch_label"`: The patch label from the `InstrumentLabel`
    - `"stack"`: The current `InstructionStack`
    - `"seed"`: The current shot-specific seed (i.e. base seed + shot index)
    - `"model"`: The default noise model, if not `None`
2. Otherwise, the parameter was not available in the program data and we move on to the next source

**"history[{args}]"**:
1. The provided `{args}` are processed from a string into a valid frame index argument
    1. If `"all"`, this is passed through
    2. If `":"` is present, this is a slice. Split on `":"`, cast each element to `int`, and construct the `slice` object
    3. If `","` is present, this is a list of indices. Split on `","`, cast each element to `int`, and construct the list.
    4. Otherwise, assume this is just an int and cast to `int`. Error out on any ValueError to the `int` cast (i.e. was not actually an int)
2. Use `History.collect_data` to collect the parameter data by key and the provided frame indices. If any non-`None` data is returned, return the data
3. Otherwise, the parameter was available in any requested `History` frame and we move on to the next source

```{warning}
Note that Step 2 of **"history[{args}]"** collection uses the fact that missing keys in a `History` frame are returned as `None`. This means that storing `None` in a `Frame` will not be distinguished from the missing case, and parameter collection for that entry will fail.

Two possible workarounds:
1. Use a different default rather than `None`
2. Manually collect the data by taking `"history"` as one of your arguments (which would be provided by the **"program"** source)
```

Once all parameters are collected, they are passed in to `Instruction.apply()` as kwargs, which will then pipe them correctly down to `Instruction.apply_fn`.

## What's next?

See the [API Reference](/_autosummary/loqs.core.quantumprogram.QuantumProgram) for more in-depth documentation of `QuantumProgram` objects.

Next, we will cover the final core objects in `LoQS`: the backends.