# Developing LoQS

## Environment

While installing `LoQS`, developers may want to use the `all`:

```
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

Additionally, developers who want an editable version of a backend may want to install those in editable mode separately.
For example, getting an editable version of `pyGSTi` 0.9.12.3 via:

```
pip install -e git+https://github.com/sandialabs/pyGSTi.git@v0.9.12.3#egg=pyGSTi
```

The editable package will then be installed under `src/pygsti`.
The tag can be replaced with any tag, branch, or commit hash to check out the exact version of the package needed.

## Testing

This project uses `tox` to perform code formatting/linting, type checking,
unit tests, and coverage reporting.
These features are available to anyone who has installed `loqs` with at least
the `[tests]` optional dependency.

Developers can run all tests using:

```
tox run
```

The first time you run `tox`, it will create different environments for each
testing stage in `.tox`.
Subsequent runs will be much faster, although these environments will need to
be rebuilt if the configuration in `tox.ini` changes (specifically if the
requirements of each environment change).

### Code Formatting and Linting

This project uses `black` for autoformatting code and `flake8` for linting.

This can be run with `tox` using

```
tox run -e lint
```

Developers can also set this up to be done locally before committing
by performing the following steps:

```
pip install -e ."[dev]"
pre-commit install
```

If you have staged files for a commit, you can then do `pre-commit run`
to run the script that will be ran during the commit process.
Alternatively, you can run `pre-commit run -a` to just format and lint
the entire codebase.

### Type Checking

This project uses lots of type annotations and `mypy` for type checking.
This can be run using `tox` via

```
tox run -e type
```

### Unit Tests

This project uses `pytest` to run unit tests and doctests.
With `tox`, the unit tests can be run in a specific environment.
For example, the `py311` environment tests Python 3.11, and tests can be
run with this version of Python via:

```
tox run -e py311
```

Developers can run unit tests `pytest` outside of `tox` also by simply doing:

```
pytest tests
```

This can be helpful to test specific files, or perhaps run `pytest` with
nonstandard flags.

Doctests are when tests are directly built into the docstring of a file/class/function.
These can be a useful way to document examples directly in the source code,
which makes them appear right next to the autogenerated reference in the documentation.

Doctests can be run by invoking `pytest` on the source code instead:

```
pytest loqs
```

### Coverage

The `tox` pipeline also generates coverage reports by using the `pytest-cov`
and `coverage` packages.
Coverage information is generated during the unit tests, and the coverage
report can be regenerated via:

```
tox run -e report
```

It's worth noting that the coverage information is also cleaned at the beginning
of each run to ensure there's no residual coverage inforomation (especially important
if using the `--cov-append` flag for `pytest`.)
This can be done at any time with:

```
tox run -e clean
```

## Documentation

This project uses `JupyterBook` for its documentation, which should be
installed if using the `[docs]` optional dependencies.
I have also noticed that `PYTHONPATH` needs to be set to the root directory
in order for `sphinx.ext.autosummary` to find the package properly.

For a developer with a local install, this should build the docs:

```
pip install -e .'[docs]'
jupyter-book build docs
```

Open `docs/_build/html/index.html` and view your docs!

Something close to the following should work for `Sphinx`-only builds:

```
jupyter-book config sphinx docs
sphinx-build docs docs/_build/html -b html
```

**Note:** Depending on how your environment is set up, you may need to include `PYTHONPATH=. ` to the beginning of any `jupyter-book` or `sphinx` build instructions.

If rebuilding the docs, it may be worth cleaning the build directory first:

```
jb clean docs
jb build docs
```

where `jb` is a built-in alias for `jupyter-book`.
If significant code changes has occurred, it may also be worth removing the `_autosummary` directory
to force a full regeneration of the automated documentation.

### Jupytext Notebooks

Several of the MyST Markdown files are actually Jupyter notebooks.
We are storing them as Markdown and converting to Jupyter notebooks using Jupytext.

Jupytext needs to be told about the kernel to use when running these as Jupyter notebooks (see the metadata block at the top of a `-notebook.md` file).
I am using the virtual environment installed during the User Guide above, which I have installed as a kernel on my system using:

```
python -m ipykernel install --user --display-name="Python 3.11 (loqs)" --name=loqs
```

A `.md` file can be initialized with this metadata using

```
jupyter-book myst init --kernel loqs <name>.md
```

or by simply copying the metadata block to the new file.

#### Syncing MyST Markdown and Jupyter Notebooks

The MyST Markdown is great for generating documentation for Sphinx, but less interactive than a Jupyter notebook.
For users with a local copy of the codebase or developers creating tutorials,
it can be convenient to work with the Jupyter notebook instead or switch back and forth between the two formats.

Luckily, conversion can be easily accomplished:

```
jupytext --to ipynb <file>.md # Convert from MyST Markdown to a Jupyter notebook
jupytext --to myst <file>.ipynb # Convert from a Jupyter notebook to MyST Markdown
```

Once the paired notebooks are created, changes can be easily propagated between the two:

```
jupytext --sync <file>.ipynb
```

Note that only the MyST Markdown will be commited to the repo,
so make sure to convert/sync to the MyST Markdown version of the file to save your work.